• ‘Apartheid’ is a political system that separates people according
to their race. Can you say which of the three countries named
below had such a political system until very recently?
(i) United States of America
(ii) South Africa
(iii) Australia
• Have you heard of Nelson Mandela? Mandela, and his African
National Congress, spent a lifetime fighting against apartheid.
Mandela had to spend thirty years in prison. Finally, democratic
elections were held in South Africa in 1994, and Mandela became
the first black President of a new nation.
In this extract from his autobiography, Long Walk to Freedom,
Mandela speaks about a historic occasion, ‘the inauguration’. Can
you guess what the occasion might be? Check your guess with
this news item (from the BBC) of 10 May 1994.
Mandela Becomes South Africa’s First Black President
Nelson Mandela has become South Africa’s first Black
President after more than three centuries of White rule.
Mr Mandela’s African National Congress (ANC) party won
252 of the 400 seats in the first democratic elections of South
Africa’s history.
The inauguration ceremony took place in the Union
Buildings amphitheatre in Pretoria today, attended by
politicians and dignitaries from more than 140 countries
around the world. “Never, never again will this beautiful land
experience the oppression of one by another, ” said Nelson
Mandela in his address.
… Jubilant scenes on the streets of Pretoria followed the
ceremony with blacks, whites and coloureds celebrating
together... More than 100,000 South African men, women
and children of all races sang and danced with joy.

TENTH May dawned bright and clear. For the past
few days I had been pleasantly besieged by
dignitaries and world leaders who were coming to
pay their respects before the inauguration. The
inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of
international leaders on South African soil.
The ceremonies took place in the lovely
sandstone amphitheatre formed by the Union
Buildings in Pretoria. For decades this had been
the seat of white supremacy, and now it was the
site of a rainbow gathering of different colours and
nations for the installation of South Africa’s first
democratic, non-racial government.
On that lovely autumn day I was accompanied
by my daughter Zenani. On the podium, Mr de Klerk
was first sworn in as second deputy president. Then

Thabo Mbeki was sworn in as first deputy president.
When it was my turn, I pledged to obey and uphold
the Constitution and to devote myself to the wellbeing of the Republic and its people. To the
assembled guests and the watching world, I said:

Today, all of us do, by our presence here... confer glory
and hope to newborn liberty. Out of the experience of
an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long,
must be born a society of which all humanity will
be proud.
We, who were outlaws not so long ago, have today
been given the rare privilege to be host to the nations of
the world on our own soil. We thank all of our
distinguished international guests for having come to
take possession with the people of our country of what
is, after all, a common victory for justice, for peace, for
human dignity.
We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation.
We pledge ourselves to liberate all our people from the
continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation, suffering,
gender and other discrimination.
Never, never, and never again shall it be that this
beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one
by another.
The sun shall never set on so glorious a human
achievement.
Let freedom reign. God bless Africa!

A few moments later we all lifted our eyes in
awe as a spectacular array of South African jets,
helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect
formation over the Union Buildings. It was not only
a display of pinpoint precision and military force,
but a demonstration of the military’s loyalty to
democracy, to a new government that had been
freely and fairly elected. Only moments before, the
highest generals of the South African defence force
and police, their chests bedecked with ribbons and
medals from days gone by, saluted me and pledged
their loyalty. I was not unmindful of the fact that
not so many years before they would not have
saluted but arrested me. Finally a chevron of Impala
jets left a smoke trail of the black, red, green, blue
and gold of the new South African flag.
The day was symbolised for me by the playing of
our two national anthems, and the vision of whites
singing ‘Nkosi Sikelel –iAfrika’ and blacks singing
‘Die Stem’, the old anthem of the Republic. Although
that day neither group knew the lyrics of the anthem
they once despised, they would soon know the
words by heart.
On the day of the inauguration, I was
overwhelmed with a sense of history. In the first
decade of the twentieth century, a few years after
the bitter Anglo-Boer war and before my own birth,
the white-skinned peoples of South Africa patched
up their differences and erected a system of racial
domination against the dark-skinned peoples of their
own land. The structure they created formed the
basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane,
societies the world has ever known. Now, in the
last decade of the twentieth century, and my own
eighth decade as a man, that system had been

overturned forever and replaced by one that
recognised the rights and freedoms of all peoples,
regardless of the colour of their skin.
That day had come about through the
unimaginable sacrifices of thousands of my people,
people whose suffering and courage can never be
counted or repaid. I felt that day, as I have on so
many other days, that I was simply the sum of all
those African patriots who had gone before me. That
long and noble line ended and now began again
with me. I was pained that I was not able to thank
them and that they were not able to see what their
sacrifices had wrought.
The policy of apartheid created a deep and lasting
wound in my country and my people. All of us will
spend many years, if not generations, recovering
from that profound hurt. But the decades of
oppression and brutality had another, unintended,
effect, and that was that it produced the Oliver
Tambos, the Walter Sisulus, the Chief Luthulis, the
Yusuf Dadoos, the Bram Fischers, the Robert
Sobukwes of our time* — men of such extraordinary

1. What do the military generals do? How has their attitude changed,
and why?
2. Why were two national anthems sung?
3. How does Mandela describe the systems of government in his country
(i) in the first decade, and (ii) in the final decade, of the twentieth century?
4. What does courage mean to Mandela?
5. Which does he think is natural, to love or to hate?

In life, every man has twin obligations —
obligations to his family, to his parents, to his wife
and children; and he has an obligation to his people,
his community, his country. In a civil and humane

courage, wisdom and generosity that their like may
never be known again. Perhaps it requires such
depths of oppression to create such heights of
character. My country is rich in the minerals and
gems that lie beneath its soil, but I have always
known that its greatest wealth is its people, finer
and truer than the purest diamonds.
It is from these comrades in the struggle that I
learned the meaning of courage. Time and again, I
have seen men and women risk and give their lives
for an idea. I have seen men stand up to attacks
and torture without breaking, showing a strength
and resilience that defies the imagination. I learned
that courage was not the absence of fear, but the
triumph over it. The brave man is not he who does
not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear.
No one is born hating another person because of
the colour of his skin, or his background, or his
religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can
learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love
comes more naturally to the human heart than its
opposite. Even in the grimmest times in prison, when
my comrades and I were pushed to our limits, I would
see a glimmer of humanity in one of the guards,
perhaps just for a second, but it was enough to
reassure me and keep me going. Man’s goodness is
a flame that can be hidden but never extinguished.

society, each man is able to fulfil those obligations
according to his own inclinations and abilities. But
in a country like South Africa, it was almost
impossible for a man of my birth and colour to fulfil
both of those obligations. In South Africa, a man of
colour who attempted to live as a human being was
punished and isolated. In South Africa, a man who
tried to fulfil his duty to his people was inevitably
ripped from his family and his home and was forced
to live a life apart, a twilight existence of secrecy
and rebellion. I did not in the beginning choose to
place my people above my family, but in attempting
to serve my people, I found that I was prevented
from fulfilling my obligations as a son, a brother, a
father and a husband.
I was not born with a hunger to be free. I was born
free — free in every way that I could know. Free to
run in the fields near my mother’s hut, free to swim
in the clear stream that ran through my village, free
to roast mealies under the stars and ride the broad
backs of slow-moving bulls. As long as I obeyed my
father and abided by the customs of my tribe, I was
not troubled by the laws of man or God.
It was only when I began to learn that my boyhood
freedom was an illusion, when I discovered as a
young man that my freedom had already been taken
from me, that I began to hunger for it. At first, as a
student, I wanted freedom only for myself, the
transitory freedoms of being able to stay out at night,
read what I pleased and go where I chose. Later, as
a young man in Johannesburg, I yearned for the
basic and honourable freedoms of achieving my
potential, of earning my keep, of marrying and
having a family — the freedom not to be obstructed
in a lawful life.
But then I slowly saw that not only was I not
free, but my brothers and sisters were not free. I
saw that it was not just my freedom that was
curtailed, but the freedom of everyone who looked
like I did. That is when I joined the African National
Congress, and that is when the hunger for my own
freedom became the greater hunger for the freedom

of my people. It was this desire for the freedom of
my people to live their lives with dignity and selfrespect that animated my life, that transformed a
frightened young man into a bold one, that drove a
law-abiding attorney to become a criminal, that
turned a family-loving husband into a man without
a home, that forced a life-loving man to live like a
monk. I am no more virtuous or self-sacrificing
than the next man, but I found that I could not
even enjoy the poor and limited freedoms I was
allowed when I knew my people were not free.
Freedom is indivisible; the chains on anyone of
my people were the chains on all of them, the
chains on all of my people were the chains on me.
I knew that the oppressor must be liberated just
as surely as the oppressed. A man who takes away
another man’s freedom is a prisoner of hatred; he is
locked behind the bars of prejudice and narrowmindedness. I am not truly free if I am taking away
someone else’s freedom, just as surely as I am not
free when my freedom is taken from me. The oppressed
and the oppressor alike are robbed of their humanity.